# sidechain

Split and merge Unix pipelines for filtering and data manipulation.

## What is it?

`sidechain` is little cousin of `xargs` and `awk` that fills a gap in the standard
line-processing tool set, extending the reach of shell-based data processing just
enough to make a difference for folks who still like to build load-bearing Unix
pipelines.

## "Sidechain?"

The name and concept are borrowed from an [audio mixing
technique](https://www.sweetwater.com/insync/sidechaining-how-it-works-why-its-cool/)
in which one audio signal is used to control a device applied to another audio
signal.

For example, a compressor on a bass guitar might be controlled by a kick drum signal.
In this setup, the bass ducks out of the way on every kick drum hit, making for a
clearer, punchier mix.

The side and main signals need not be different instruments. The side signal may be a
filtered copy of the main signal. For example, a simple technique for [de-essing
vocals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/De-essing#Side-chain_compression_or_broadband_de-essing)
is to use a compressor triggered by a high-pass-filtered copy of the main vocal
channel.

## Details
In a data pipeline, we can use `sidechain` to control our critical path using a side
command or pipeline.

While use cases of `sidechain` overlap with those of `xargs` or `awk`, `sidechain`
has one key benefit: **it does not spawn a new process for every line of input**.

### Basic Example
Imagine we have lines of JSON-in-TSV:
```txt
# input.tsv
alice	{"foo":0,"bar":1}
billy	{"foo":1,"bar":1}
charlie	{"bar":0,"foo":1}
```
We want to filter this data, producing a list of users having `.foo != .bar`.

It's easy to use `cut -f2 | jq 'select(.foo != .bar)'`, but then we'd lose the
usernames.

`sidechain` makes this easy. We can filter the data by using our `cut | jq` pipeline
as the side command, leaving the original lines intact:

```bash
$ cat input.tsv | sidechain filter -p true 'cut -f2 | jq ".foo != .bar"'

# output
alice	{"foo":0,"bar":1}
charlie	{"bar":0,"foo":1}
```
Arguments:
* `'cut -f | jq ".foo != bar"'`: The side command. This happens to output `true` when
  the condition is met.
* `-p true`: Retain only those lines whose side outputs match the pattern `true`.

Here, we're telling `sidechain` to start the side command, then pipe each input line
to it and filter for the pattern `true`. Input lines that pass this test are emitted
**in their original, unmangled form.**

Note: by default, when your input is provided via stdin, `sidechain` passes it on to
the side command. You may not always want this; see the docs for how to control it
explicitly.

## Map Mode
In map mode, your side command generates values which can be merged back into your
main output.

We can use `-I` (like `xargs`) to define a placeholder character for our generated
values:

```bash
sidechain map -I% --side SIDE_CMD MAIN_CMD
```

### Example: JSON clean-up
Suppose you have a file containing lines of JSON with a `"url"` field, and you want
to extract the host portion from each URL and add it as a field to each JSON record.

```json
{"name":"alice","date":"2024-02-01","url":"https://foo.com"}
{"name":"robert","date":"2024-01-01","url":"http://1.2.3.4:8000/api"}
```

It's not too difficult to extract the host from a URL. But how would you surgically
do it for a URL embedded in JSON?

`sidechain map` makes this simple.

For simplicity, let's imagine you have a tool called `host-from-url` to extract the
hosts from the URLs. In reality, you could use this Ruby one-liner:
```bash
ruby -r uri -ne 'u = URI($_.chomp); puts(u.host || "")'
```

```bash
cat input.json | sidechain map -I% --side 'jq .url | host-from-url' jq '.host = "%"'
```

Here, the side command, `jq .url | host-from-url`, extracts and outputs the hosts.

The main command is `jq '.host = "%"'`. The values generated by the side command are
inserted back into the main command's output.

Remember, the side and main commands are each **only invoked once**.

## Using `$[]`
For cleaner, more-intuitive interpolation, you can use `$[]` to wrap your side
command:

```bash
cat input.json | sidechain map jq '.host = "$[jq .url | host-from-url]"'
```

This has the same behavior as the `-I%` version; it's just another way to spell it.

## Multiple Side Commands
Continuing with the URL-parsing example, imagine you want to not only extract the
host, but also the port:

```bash
cat input.json | sidechain map jq '
    .host = $[jq .url | host-from-url] |
    .port = $[jq .url | port-from-url]
  '
```

This is great, but it has a little bit of needless duplicated work: `jq .url` is run
twice in parallel.

To prevent this, you can insert a preliminary side command that feeds into your
downstream ones:
```bash
cat input.json | sidechain map \
  --side 'jq .url' \
  jq '.host = $[host-from-url] | .port = $[port-from-url]'
```
